# Diamond Price Prediction Project

This repository contains a machine learning project for predicting diamond prices based on various features such as carat, cut, color, clarity, and more. The project is implemented in Python and utilizes popular libraries like scikit-learn, tensorflow and Flask for model training and web-based prediction.

Live project link - https://sanskarmodi8.github.io/Diamond_Price_Pred/

Flask API is deployed on Azure and React website is hosted on Github Pages.

Deployed Flask API link - https://diamondpricepredictorapp.azurewebsites.net/

This project uses various Models to train on the dataset and the Best model is saved and used for prediction.

List of models the project uses to train on the dataset -

- Linear Regression
- Ridge Regression
- Lasso Regression
- Decision Trees
- Random Forest Regressor
- Gradient Boosting
- Support Vector Machines
- XgBoost
- Artificial Neural Network (Custom MLP)

## Project Structure

The project is organized as follows:

- `.gitignore`: This file specifies which files and directories should be ignored by Git.

- `package.json`: This file is for gh-pages dependencies for the website deployment
 
- `package-lock.json`: This file is used to lock down and ensure consistent gh-pages dependency versions across different installations or deployment.

- `README.md`: You are currently reading this file, which serves as the project's documentation.

- `application.py`: This is the Flask application file responsible for serving the web application.

- `notebooks`: This directory contains Jupyter notebooks used for data exploration, analysis, and visualization. The `data` folder within this directory contains the dataset used for this project.

- `requirements.txt`: This file lists all the Python libraries and dependencies required to run the project.

- `setup.py`: This is the setup file for the project, which may include additional configuration settings.

- `src`: This directory contains the source code for the project, organized into several subdirectories and files:
    - `logs`: This directory contains log files generated by the project.
    - `components`: This directory contains Python modules for various project components, including:
        - `data_ingestion.py`: Handles the process of loading and preparing the dataset.
        - `data_transformation.py`: Performs data preprocessing and feature engineering.
        - `model_trainer.py`: Contains code for training and evaluating machine learning models.
    - `pipelines`: This directory contains data processing or machine learning pipelines used in the project, including:
        - `training_pipeline.py`: Defines the training pipeline for model development.
        - `prediction_pipeline.py`: Defines the pipeline for making predictions using the trained model.
    - `exception.py`: This file defines custom exceptions or error handling logic for the project.
    - `logger.py`: Manages logging and output to log files.
    - `utils.py`: Contains utility functions used throughout the project.

- `client`: This directory contains the project files for the ReactJS framework which is being used in this project for the frontend.

## Getting Started

To get started with this project, follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository to your local machine using the following command:

```bash
git clone <repository_url>
```

2. Navigate to the project directory:

```bash
cd Diamond_Price_Pred
```

3. Install the required dependencies using pip:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. Run the Flask application after setting the port to 8080 in application.py file:

```bash
python application.py
```

5. Go to the client folder

```bash
cd client
```

6. Install Dependencies

```bash
npm install
```

7. Start your Web application on your localhost

```bash
npm start
```

## Usage

Once you have the web application running, you can use it to predict the price of diamonds based on the input features. Simply provide the required information, and the application will provide you with a price prediction.

Additionally, you can explore the Jupyter notebooks in the `notebooks` directory to understand the data analysis and model development process.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! If you'd like to contribute to this project, please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository.
2. Create a new branch for your feature or bug fix: `git checkout -b feature-name`.
3. Make your changes and commit them: `git commit -m 'Description of your changes'`.
4. Push your changes to your fork: `git push origin feature-name`.
5. Create a pull request on the original repository.



